# eBPF file-delete tracer

## Overview
This project demonstrates the use of eBPF (Extended Berkeley Packet Filter) to trace file deletion events on a Linux system. The eBPF program is loaded from an ELF file and attached to the appropriate kernel hooks to monitor file deletions.

## Demo

[Watch the video](https://srodi.fra1.cdn.digitaloceanspaces.com/demo.MP4) for a short demonstration of this tool in action.

## Prerequisites
- Go (version 1.16 or higher)
- Linux system with eBPF support
- `clang` and `llvm` for compiling eBPF programs
- `libbpf` library
- `bpftool` command-line tool to inspect and manage BPF objects

## Installation
1. **Install Go**: Follow the instructions on the [official Go website](https://golang.org/doc/install). In Ubuntu/Debian you can also install go as follows:
    ```sh
    sudo apt install golang-go
    echo 'export GOPATH=$HOME/go' >> ~/.profile
    echo 'export PATH=$GOPATH/bin:$PATH' >> ~/.profile
    source ~/.profile
    ```
2. **Install clang and llvm**:
    ```sh
    sudo apt-get install clang llvm
    ```
3. **Install libbpf**:
    ```sh
    sudo apt-get install libbpf-dev
    ```
4. **Clone the repository**:
    ```sh
    git clone https://github.com/srodi/ebpf-file-delete-tracer.git
    cd ebpf-file-delete-tracer
    ```

## Usage
1. **Compile the eBPF program**:
    ```sh
    clang -O2 -g -target bpf -c trace_file_delete.c -o trace_file_delete.o
    ```
2. **Run the Go program**:
    ```sh
    sudo go run main.go
    ```

## Code Explanation

The implementation for the eBPF program is found in [trace_file_delete.c](trace_file_delete.c) and the implementation for the user space application is in [main.go](main.go).

## Trace File Delete eBPF Program

This eBPF program is designed to trace the `unlinkat` system call, which is used to delete files in the Linux operating system. The program captures and logs details about the process performing the deletion and the file being deleted. Below is a detailed description of the key components and functionality of the program:

1. **Header Inclusions**:
    - `vmlinux.h`: Includes kernel structures and definitions.
    - `bpf_helpers.h`, `bpf_tracing.h`, `bpf_core_read.h`: Include BPF-specific functions and helpers.

2. **Event Structure**:
    - Defines a structure `event` to hold the data that will be sent to user space. This includes:
        - `pid`: Process ID of the process performing the deletion.
        - `comm`: Command name (process name).
        - `filename`: Name of the file being deleted.

3. **BPF Map**:
    - Defines a BPF map `events` of type `BPF_MAP_TYPE_PERF_EVENT_ARRAY` to send events to user space. This map can hold up to 1024 entries.

4. **Tracepoint**:
    - Attaches to the `sys_enter_unlinkat` tracepoint, which is triggered when the `unlinkat` system call is invoked.
    - In the tracepoint handler `trace_unlinkat`:
        - Initializes an `event` structure.
        - Retrieves the current process ID and command name.
        - Reads the filename argument from user space.
        - Outputs the event to user space using `bpf_perf_event_output`.

5. **License**:
    - Specifies the license for the eBPF program as GPL.

## Main Go File for eBPF Program

This Go file sets up an eBPF program to monitor and prevent file deletions. The program performs the following steps:

1. **Set RLIMIT_MEMLOCK Resource Limit**:
    - Adjusts the RLIMIT_MEMLOCK resource limit to allow locking memory for eBPF.
    - Uses `unix.Setrlimit` to set the RLIMIT_MEMLOCK resource limit to memLockLimit which is set to 64 MiB.

2. **Load eBPF Program**:
    - Loads the compiled eBPF program from an ELF file specified by `bpfProgPath`.
    - Uses `ebpf.LoadCollectionSpec` to load the eBPF program from the specified ELF file.

3. **Create eBPF Collection**:
    - Creates a new eBPF collection from the loaded program.
    - Uses `ebpf.NewCollection` to create a new eBPF collection from the loaded program.

4. **Attach eBPF Program to Tracepoint**:
    - Attaches the eBPF program to the `sys_enter_unlinkat` tracepoint to monitor file deletions.
    - Uses `link.Tracepoint` to attach the eBPF program to the `sys_enter_unlinkat` tracepoint.

5. **Set Up Perf Event Reader**:
    - Sets up a perf event reader to read events generated by the eBPF program.
    - Uses `perf.NewReader` to create a perf event reader for the `events` map in the eBPF collection.

6. **Handle System Signals**:
    - Handles system signals (SIGINT, SIGTERM) for graceful shutdown.
    - Uses `os.Signal` and `syscall` to handle SIGINT and SIGTERM signals for graceful shutdown.

7. **Read and Print eBPF Program Output**:
    - Reads and prints the output from the eBPF program (perf event reader), which includes the PID, command, and filename of the process attempting to delete a file.

This file is essential for setting up and running the eBPF program to monitor file deletions on a Linux system.

## Contributing
We welcome contributions! Please follow these steps:
1. Fork the repository.
2. Create a new branch (`git checkout -b feature-branch`).
3. Make your changes.
4. Commit your changes (`git commit -am 'Add new feature'`).
5. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature-branch`).
6. Create a new Pull Request.

## License
This project is licensed under the Apache 2.0 License. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

---

# Environment set-up on WSL2 - Ubuntu-24.04

Update the package lists for upgrades and new package installations, and upgrade all installed packages to their latest versions without prompting for confirmation.
```sh
sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade --yes
```

Install the libbpf development library and search for the file named `"bpf_helpers.h"` within the `/usr/include` directory.

```sh
sudo apt install libbpf-dev
find /usr/include -name "bpf_helpers.h"
```

Ensure that the BPF filesystem is mounted 

```sh
sudo mount -t bpf bpf /sys/fs/bpf/
```

---

# bpftool

`bpftool` is a utility for inspection and manipulation of eBPF programs and maps on a Linux system. It allows users to load, verify, and attach eBPF programs, as well as query and update eBPF maps. For more information, refer to the [libbpf/bpftool GitHub repo](https://github.com/libbpf/bpftool)


## Quickstart

Install and use `bpftool`. 4. In Linux distributions this package is provided by `linux-tools-common`

```sh
sudo apt-get install linux-tools-common
```

If you are using `WSL2` you will have to install `bpftool` manually

```sh
git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/libbpf/bpftool.git
cd bpftool/src
sudo make install
```

Generate `vmlinux.h` using `bpftools`

```sh
bpftool btf dump file /sys/kernel/btf/vmlinux format c > vmlinux.h
```

## Compile and load eBPF program

Compile the `C` code 

```sh
clang -O2 -g -target bpf -c trace_file_delete.c -o trace_file_delete.o
```

Load the BPF Program using `bpftool` - this command will also `attach` the program to `tracepoint/syscalls/sys_enter_unlinkat`

```sh
sudo bpftool prog load trace_file_delete.o /sys/fs/bpf/trace_unlinkat autoattach
```

Show loaded BPF program details in `json` format

```sh
sudo bpftool --json --pretty prog show |jq -r '.[] | select(.name=="trace_unlinkat")'
```

## Development iterations

To detach the program and remove the pinned file (prior to re-compiling `C` code)

```sh
sudo rm /sys/fs/bpf/trace_unlinkat
```

---

# Debug

You can add arbitrary print statements in the ebpf program as follows

```c
// debug sending output at /sys/kernel/debug/tracing/trace_pipe
bpf_printk("PID: %d, COMM: %s, FILENAME: %s\n", evt.pid, evt.comm, evt.filename);
```

You can view the debug log at `/sys/kernel/debug/tracing/trace_pipe`

```sh
❯ sudo cat /sys/kernel/debug/tracing/trace_pipe | grep -i bpf_trace_printk            
           <...>-138718  [010] ....1 32416.629533: bpf_trace_printk: PID: 138718, COMM: rm, FILENAME: some
```

Check for kernel logs errors

```sh
dmesg | tail
```
